is language a method of communicating
ideas yes in part but it's even more
important to remember that language is
part of the way that we make sense of
our own lives in our interior monologues
it's the way we understand our own
motivations it's the way we plan for the
future even just thinking about what
you're doing tomorrow the choice of
words we use it's not so important it's
not so crucial in avoiding offending
other people it's very important to be
aware of the words you're using when
you're reasoning things through
privately in your own interior monologue
you very much can talk yourself into
something you can talk yourself into
believing something maybe without
noticing that you're doing it in this
sense I would you know advise all of you
to be much more aware of your choice of
words when you're not speaking out loud
had two different people writing in to
me asking the same question from two
very different angles one commenting on
discord could join the discussion below
one more of a personal friend and
private correspondence and whether you
word it one way or another the point is
this aren't I being terribly unjust in
condemning the entire category of what
they consider leisure activities
self-indulgence fun isn't my view of the
world terribly demanding and ascetic
isn't it demanding that each and every
one of you spend every moment of your
day in pursuit of your own highest goals
to become the best person you can be in
so on and so forth isn't that
unreasonable given that they say there's
sort of a spectrum of self-indulgence
there's a spectrum of pleasures and that
there are some things I am in under this
spectrum I don't reject the whole
spectrum entirely therefore my critique
of any one part of the spectrum is is is
null and void now I disagree with every
single step in this reasoning even the
idea that what you call leisure exists
on a spectrum I reject the idea that
what you call leisure exists frankly if
you get topic for another video
oh the
you know the idea that cocaine is in any
way similar to me having sex with my
girlfriend completely discursive I
completely reject this I regard using
cocaine as something self-destructive
poisonous toxic causing brain damage
I don't even regard it as pleasure right
I dispute the most fundamental premise
here okay I reject it entirely and I
think none of those things are a valid
description of having sex with my
girlfriend I'm obviously I'm just
specifying her so we don't have
extraneous its copier I feel I think
once in a while people do raise a
question well when you say sex what
about someone who's a sex addict and has
sex with ten thousand people in a year
or something like this
all right we're leaving that aside so
we're talking about within the bounds of
normal daily activities of sex I
completely reject the analogy I
completely reject the line of reasoning
that makes this scene plausible to you
okay there are people who will talk
about other lesser activities whether it
be skiing or snowboarding or playing
video games I've had many many people
writing in to me with this kind of line
of reasoning about playing video games
like well if you're okay with having sex
and you're okay with eating food like
choosing eat food that doesn't taste
awful as opposed to those then you must
admit that video games exist on this
same spectrum no no I don't I regard
video games for a grown adult as
something self-destructive I really do I
really do regard the waste of your time
when you're playing video games and
going skiing as something that is
completely different from and not in the
same category as having sex with your
girlfriend all right so on a really
basic level what I'm asking to do here
it's not really to question my words or
your words but to question your way of
thinking because you're already deeply
committed to some kind of rationale
some kind of self-justification if you
think that an adult sitting on the couch
playing a child's entertainment video
game system playing mario 64 for 12
hours a day if you think that is in any
way on the same spectrum with eating
food drinking water breathing air or me
having sex with my girlfriend you're
just profoundly fundamentally wrong and
the reason I don't want to really talk
about this the reason I don't want to
make this video is that you mostly get
into semantics in English the word
semantics gets a bad name
people say oh if it's a semantic
discussion somehow it's trivial it's not
a real conversation
no semantics also matter but it means
we're getting down into the kind of
boring details of the precise meanings
of words and what it is we want mistress
okay my friend Mohammed his personal
friend of mine he's appeared on the
channel in the past I think of him as a
very intelligent very gifted guy flawed
has his limits you don't no doubt he's
not equally gifted uniquely intelligent
no areas none of us are and as we've
gotten to know each other better
interestingly have started to appreciate
some of the areas where he has
weaknesses or hang-ups limitations okay
he really earnestly asked me aren't I
wrong in this whole approach to I don't
know what you call it anti Hedden ism
anti hedonism depending on your accent
you know my whole approach to this kind
of work ethic I have of you know really
looking at every minute of every day of
your life and expecting it to be in this
sense meaningful productive and
rejecting video games and rejecting
skiing and rejecting cocaine and all the
festivities whole category of excuse
making that people get get committed to
because he asked the question instead in
terms of this isn't it possible for
someone to be highly intelligent someone
to be brilliant even and nevertheless
enjoy doing stupid things sometimes and
I said to him no I very fundamentally
believe that intelligence is something
you're doing all the time and you can't
stop it even if you want to
you're an intelligent person you can't
turn it off
even when you sleep and I challenged him
with real-world examples that said you
Mohammed today could you sit down for
three hours and watch football on
television and could you enjoy doing
that you know like you could dress up in
a costume and go to a soccer stadium and
pretend to be a soccer fan but I know
you I know you're not capable of sitting
there in a joint even if you forced
yourself to do this you would be sitting
there and thinking about Aristotle less
you could be so completely detached from
this game and what was exciting and
interesting to other people you just
regard it like you were in a prison cell
and set your mind to doing some other
productive tasks with us thinking about
your work life or your personal life or
philosophy or politics I know this
particular guy and he immediately
conceded the point so yeah that's true
he's like no I can't force myself to
enjoy watching football I can't do
things and let's not just say in the
after it's not just something normal
people would enjoy
he has members of his family he has you
know close friends and members of family
who really do spend many hours watching
sports so I think most of us do most of
us know people like that so you know the
burden and the misery of really being a
brilliant intelligent person is that you
can't turn it off it's on all the time
all right
it infects and informs everything you do
with your mind and it's closed off to
you forever to enjoy life in the way
that stupid people do right and one of
the notions that really corrupted my
generation growing up in Toronto at the
time they did is the idea that you could
enjoy these things ironically like you
can sit there and tell yourself oh I'm
too smart to enjoy watching this TV show
but I'm gonna ironically sit here and
enjoy no homie if you sit there and
watch Seinfeld if you sit there and
watch 90 day fianc
there is absolutely no sense in which
you can tell yourself I'm too good for
this entertainment you're
being entertained by it right there's no
sense in which you can snort cocaine and
tell yourself oh well I'm not like other
crackheads better than other people who
get high because when I get high I'm
doing it ironically
okay and for me that goes the whole way
down your whole so-called spectrum
alright what you call leisure activities
I mean obviously there's not every one
of the audience but you and you and you
some of you in the audience will you
call lesser activities I think you're
coming to the wrong answers because
fundamentally you're asking the wrong
questions the question I'm asking is is
this activity something that's
productive and education on wholesome
for me as an adult male intellectual is
this something I'm gonna learn and grow
from or is this something ultimately
toxic self-destructive is it something
leading to my betterment or is it
leading to my dissolution and if you
enjoy doing things that lead to your own
dissolution if you enjoy engaging in
dissolute activities if you enjoy
consciously and intentionally engaging
in self-destructive activities if you
think it's fun to waste your own time
then you really have to sit in the
mirror and ask what the kind of
person am I
and the answer is you are the same type
of person as the things that you do if
you spend your time sitting on the couch
watching sports you're no better than
that
that's who you are if you spend 12 hours
a day playing Mario 64 that is who you
are there's no separate judgment there's
no special soul you have that somehow
untouched by the things you do with your
mind and your body you're not just the
sum of your parts you're less you got so
many days on this earth so many hours in
good health and with a clean mind what
are you gonna do with it
if there's one less person sitting in
the stands at that football game if
there's one empty seed what goddamn
difference is that going to make any
group in the world
if one fewer person downloads that video
game and clicks on a bunch of blinking
gems today to make those gems disappear
what difference is that going to make in
the world all right and then you tell me
what's the unique difference you could
be making the world if you stop making
these excuses if you took your
whole goddamn spectrum of so-called
pleasures leisure activities and
self-indulgence and through it the
away and asked you what's the point of
living for the next five years next ten
years on this planet